February 2023 newsletter (#206)
readthedocs/blog: newsletter-february-2023.rst

.. post:: Feb 7, 2023
   :tags: newsletter, python
   :author: Ben
   :location: MLM

.. meta::
   :description lang=en:
      Company updates and new features from the last month,
      current focus, and upcoming features.

Read the Docs newsletter - February 2023
========================================

News and updates
----------------

Here are the latest updates from our team since the :doc:`previous newsletter </newsletter-january-2023>`:

- 🪄️ Build outputs are now stored in a well-known location: ``_readthedocs/<format>``.
  This opens up many new and exciting possibilities for generating and processing final output formats,
  which we will uncover in an upcoming blog post.
  *PDFs for MkDocs* and *encrypted documentation* are just two demos that we have ready.
  **Stay tuned!**
- 🌪️ Uploads are faster and done in parallel,
  thanks our migration to `rclone`_ which is in staged deploy to ensure availability. 

> - 🔒️ `CORS`_ headers now have a minimal subset of required origins, methods and credentials. Public API endpoints are defined to reject credentials from unknown origins.

Author: Pending :eyes:  from @stsewd

> .. post:: Feb 1, 2023

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. post:: Feb 7, 2023
```

   :tags: newsletter, python
   :author: Ben
   :location: MLM

.. meta::
   :description lang=en:
      Company updates and new features from the last month,
      current focus, and upcoming features.

Read the Docs newsletter - February 2023
========================================

News and updates
----------------

Here are the latest updates from our team since the :doc:`previous newsletter </newsletter-january-2023>`:

> - 🪄️ Build outputs are now stored in a well-known location, available to the build process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🪄️ Build outputs are now stored in a well-known location: `_readthedocs/<format>`.
```

  This opens up many new and exciting possibilities for generating and processing final output formats,
  which we will uncover in an upcoming blog post.
  PDFs for MkDocs and encrypted documentations are just two demos that we have ready.
  **Stay tuned!**

> - 🌪️ Uploads are faster and done in parallel,
>   thanks to `rclone`_. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🌪️ Uploads are faster and done in parallel,
  thanks our migration to `rclone`_ which is in staged deploy to ensure availability. 
```

> - 🔒️ CORS headers have been tightened on all platforms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🔒️ CORS headers been updated to unauthenticated access to all public information on approved API endpoints.
```

We need to tell people what this is doing.

Reviewer: @stsewd We should document our CORS setup as part of that work, as a note.

> - 🛠️ The default branch of a git repository is now correctly detected in manual imports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🛠️ The default branch of a Git repository is now correctly detected in manual imports.
```

:)

Reviewer 2: he he, multiple Anthony suggestions on this over time made us to improve our eyes and detect this immediately now 😄

>   This was a long-standing bug that we are very happy to finally have fixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This was a long-standing bug that we are very happy to fix.
```

- 🎤️ Write the Docs has announced their 2023 conferences.

>   Read more in `their announcement`_.

Reviewer: I'd put this at the bottom?

- 🔒️ Security issue found and fixed: `Path traversal: access to files from any project <GHSA-5w8m-r7jm-mhp9>`_
- 🔒️ Security issue found and fixed: `Symlink following: Arbitrary file access from builder server <GHSA-hqwg-gjqw-h5wg>`_
- 🔒️ Security issue found and fixed: `Cache poisoning <GHSA-7fcx-wwr3-99jv>`_

> - 🚦️ Note from Cloudflare that provides CDN for everything on readthedocs.io:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🚦️ A maintenance update from Cloudflare that provides our CDN and SSL provisioning. 
We are working to ensure that nothing is offline other than creation of new domains:
```

Reviewer: Also seems like this should be in the Issues section?

Author: I agree, will move it. It also makes the issues section more relevant to look at.

    On February 14th, 2023,
    Cloudflare will be doing database maintenance that will impact SSL API availability and may result in certificate issuance delays.
    The scheduled maintenance will be on February 14, 2023, 14:00 - 16:00 UTC.

.. _rclone: https://rclone.org/
.. _their announcement: https://www.writethedocs.org/blog/2023-january-update/
.. _GHSA-5w8m-r7jm-mhp9: https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/security/advisories/GHSA-5w8m-r7jm-mhp9
.. _GHSA-hqwg-gjqw-h5wg: https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/security/advisories/GHSA-hqwg-gjqw-h5wg
.. _GHSA-7fcx-wwr3-99jv: https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/security/advisories/GHSA-7fcx-wwr3-99jv

You can always see the latest changes to our platforms in our :doc:`Read the Docs Changelog <readthedocs:changelog>`.

.. raw:: html

   <a href="https://about.readthedocs.com/" style="background-color: #409cff; border-radius: 3px; color: #ffffff; display: block; margin: 30px auto; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 700; line-height: 24px; padding: 15px 0 15px 0; text-align: center; text-decoration: none; width: 238px;">
     Discover all the features ✨️
   </a>

> Upcoming features

Reviewer: Seems like this section didn't get written?

Author: The few items that I found follow after the huge comment block :)

-----------------

..
  Notes:

  Next newsletter:

>   Make a general announcement of our Roadmap

Author: @ericholscher is there a basis for this? perhaps we'll just push this for March? :)

Reviewer: Can you clarify a bit more? This is presumably about our roadmap being publicly accessible for users. 

https://github.com/orgs/readthedocs/projects/156/views/1

It's not super useful tho necessarily :)

Author: Yes, that's what it's about. Perhaps it was only on call with @humitos - but we talked about an old intention to make the roadmap not _just_ public but also _announced_, so we would need to motivate users about why to look at our roadmap and how they can use it etc.

It's probably better that we go over this in conversation to see if there's a way forward for this.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, my idea was just to mention that we have a public roadmap in case people want to take a look at it --without going too fancy on this. Just a note, basically.

Author: https://github.com/readthedocs/meta/issues/13#issuecomment-1109759481

  General:

  When creating newsletter drafts, we keep the items here from the previous newsletter.
  This is in order to ensure due follow-up on features that are announced publicly.
  
  Feature done? A great follow-up is to add what was previously an upcoming feature as a released feature in the former section.
  
  Feature not done?
  Make sure that upcoming features are announced with a link to issues or PRs where the progress can be seen.
  If this is done, then subsequent newsletters aren't compelled to share progress when it's uninteresting.
  
  If a feature was announced as upcoming but isn't yet released,
  then try rephrasing the announcement as a general news update about the progress and where it can be followed.

- More internal components of the build process will have a public API, giving full control and flexibility and allowing for more documentation tools to be used.
- Our Diátaxis documentation refactor is entering final stages before the first reveal.

Interested in all the details? `View our full Roadmap 📍️`_

> .. _View our full Roadmap 📍️: https://github.com/orgs/readthedocs/projects/156/views/4

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _View our full Roadmap 📍️: https://github.com/orgs/readthedocs/projects/156/views/1
```

Not sure why we're linking to the backlog?

Possible issues
---------------

* The change of the standard build output directory will cause issues for anyone that has custom builds and have guessed the old unofficial output directory.
  See technical details in `readthedocs.org#9888`_
* If you want to use Sphinx 6 wth sphinx-rtd-theme,

>   we will ship an update next week of both the new theme and an update on our platform dealing with the removal of jQuery from Sphinx.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  we will ship an update soon of both the new theme and an update on our platform dealing with the removal of jQuery from Sphinx.
```

Author: I'll coordinate this with the item below. Releases are shipping today :crossed_fingers:

Author: Fixed in a new version

  See also :doc:`/sphinx6-upgrade`.
* A new sphinx-rtd-theme 1.2.0 has been released together with a Sphinx 6-ready upgrade of our Sphinx builder. We removed an injection of a legacy setting ``html_theme_path`` used with very old versions of Sphinx ``<1.6``.

.. _readthedocs.org#9888: https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/pull/9888

Awesome Project of the month
----------------------------

> TBD

Author: Will coordinate with @humitos

Author: That sounds fair, it's really good to have the newsletter shipped today with the upcoming releases!

Author: Saved for next month

Awesome Read the Docs Projects List 🕶️
--------------------------------------

> .. Depending on interaction, maybe time to turn this into a link in the above section

Reviewer: That seems like a better fit. Similar to the other "see more" links above.

Interested in all the details? `View our full Roadmap 📍️`_

.. _View our full Roadmap 📍️: https://github.com/orgs/readthedocs/projects/156/views/1

Possible issues
---------------

- 🚦️ There is a schedule maintenance window on Cloudflare that provides our CDN and SSL provisioning. 
  We are working to ensure that nothing is offline other than creation of new domains:

    On February 14th, 2023,
    Cloudflare will be doing database maintenance that will impact SSL API availability and may result in certificate issuance delays.
    The scheduled maintenance will be on February 14, 2023, 14:00 - 16:00 UTC.

- The change of the standard build output directory will cause issues for anyone that has custom builds and have guessed the old unofficial output directory.
  See technical details in `readthedocs.org#9888`_
- If you want to use Sphinx 6 with sphinx-rtd-theme,
  we have shipped an update of both the new theme and an update on our platform dealing with the removal of jQuery from Sphinx.

>   See also :doc:`/sphinx6-upgrade`.

Reviewer: Should we update this post with this information as well? A lot of users looking to upgrade will land there. 

Not a blocker for this PR, but another PR instead.

Author: That's a great idea!
